***** Image Smoothing - Homogeneous blur, Gaussian blur, Median blur, Median Blur *****

Let us begin with image smoothing filters. Image smoothing filters are the same as image blurring filter, which aim to smooth a region by replacing pixel values by some linear or non-linear function of neighbourhood values.

Pixel neighbourhood can be rectangular (generally) or disk shaped. Image filtering can be linear (in case of homogeneous blur, Gaussian blur, etc.) as well as non-linear (median blur, etc.) with respect to neighbourhood pixel values.

In this lecture, we will talk about average filtering and Gaussian filtering.

To being with in MATLAB, we have a function by the name "fspecial()" to which you pass arguments for getting desired filter.

In order to generate average filter:
h = fspecial('average', hsize);
returns an averaging filter h of size hsize. The argument hsize can be a vector specifying the number of rows and columns in h, or it can be a scalar, in which case h is a square matrix. The default value for hsize is [3 3].

And to obtain Gaussian filter:
h = fspecial('gaussian', hsize, sigma); 
returns a rotationally symmetric Gaussian low-pass filter of size hsize with standard deviation sigma (positive). hsize can be a vector specifying the number of rows and columns in h, or it can be a scalar, in which case h is a square matrix. The default value for hsize is [3 3]; the default value for sigma is 0.5.

Now in order to filter a 2D image, MATLAB has a function by the name "imfilter()" which is implemented as:
B = imfilter(A,h);
filters the image array A with the 2D filter h. The result B has the same size and type as A.

To apply median filter to an image, 
B = medfilt2(A); 
performs median filtering of the matrix A using the default 3-by-3 neighbourhood.

As we increase the neighbourhood size of filter, the extent of image blurring increases. The averaging filter act as low-pass filter normalizing image pixel intensity variations. As a result, the edges (which consist of sharp intensity variations across them) in an image also get blurred which is not desired. 

However edges in an image can be prevented from blurring by using edge-preserving filters, which will be discussed in next lecture.